Engineers and Scholars find the exact cause of the Construct Awakening to a bit of a black box, what is known is that it was sudden, and it happened en masse. Meaning it wasn't one at a time, the entire construct army stopped in its tracks for 3 entire days and by the end of it they all awoke with memories of before, but describing what they were now as different. This is strange because there isn't really anything like a mental network that binds Constructs together and constructs weren't all built at once so it's not really a "over time" thing.

What is known is that this isn't the first time something like this has happened, but that event was similarly a black box.

The Puppets of Avverine, a construct race less built for war more for servitude awoke in a similar matter 40 years ago, though that event was even more violent as it was the night of the Puppet Massacre where the Puppets turned on their masters and began a weeklong period of terror, before the surviving puppets fled Avverine, they now live outside of Avverine and have spread their numbers across the continent of Telara.

The Constructs likewise do not know what happened in the three days they were down, treating it as a gap in the memory banks, which is strange because they do have records before and after the shutdown.

Current theories to the awakening

- The Aasimar Theory - Some scholars argue that Awakened Constructs are actually Aasimar, or a similar creature, who have found more convenient bodies. This is partially contradicted by the fact that Constructs do not share any aasimar traits such as wings, and Aasimar cannot inhabit constructed bodies, which has lead to the subspecies theory, stating that Constructs are simply a different species of Aasimar, which fellow scholars have dismissed as a moving target to make the evidence fit with the theory.
- The Mass Awaken/Wish Theory - Awaken, a 5th Tier spell is known to be able to grant consciousness to animals, plants, or even constructs. Or the mythical Wish Spell, which some legends have suggested can alter reality itself, are theories as well. The theory goes that a powerful Magician cast these spells to awaken the constructs. This theory fits current understanding of magic, but precisely who could be powerful enough, and why magicians and sorcerers didn't notice that kind of magic being cast in the weave is a specific counterpoint to this theory.
- The Murmuration Theory - Constructs are Magical Creatures, so their very presences affects the weave. The theory goes that a massive gathering of Constructs created the conditions in the weave en masse to create a large and sudden change, like an awakening, like how a gathering of starlings can affect the flight pattern of the flock into a murmuration.
- The Outside Influence Theory - Theories among religious scholars is that the Scattered Light granted sentience to both the Puppets of Avverine and the Constructs of Grovenvaulte as a grand miracle. Shaman of Taro argue that the Taro within the Constructs simply awakened. Monks of La argue that Constructs like all things, are part of the song. Still some religious constructs argue they were awakened by the Clockwork God, who wish them to be emissaries to his moving gears.