While it would be inaccurate to say that the Drow RULED the Underdark, the Underdark was often defined by their movements. The Drow, their wars and machinations shaped the other societies in turn. So the Shattering of Colomb Bith coinciding with the disappearance of most Drow, their absence shaped the Underdark as well. The largely benevolent Myconid, often stamped out by the wars of the Drow, flourished in their absence. The Duegar, ever industrious, quickly made alliances with the Svirfneblin and the Myconid to grow the cities anew. Before long the first treaties with the over world were met, and while the Underdark largely stays out of the affairs of the surface dwellers, they have found it mutually beneficial to trade and act as structural support for cities.
 
Underdark cities are built from Myconid, many buildings are literally dormant myconid acting as housing, though other constructs are common, they are usually overgrown. Every Underdark cities run by Myconid act as a massive Mycelial network. It is not unfair to say that every individual myconid is part of the larger Mycelial Structure. In fact most Myconids in a city are genetically identical as they initially grew from the network, though new genetic material is transferred as Myconids from other Underdark cities migrate.
 
Undercities exist under every major city, sometimes multiple undercities depending on the size. This has created a symbiotic relationship, as sewage, waste disposal, and water treatment are often pumped down into the Undercities, where it acts as food for the Myconids.