Conditional Magic or Academic Standard Magic - Magic based on elaborate hand gestures and verbal catalysts. This is the most common form of magic being extremely reliable and versatile, while being able to access the more esoteric forms of magic.
 
Applied Magical Theory - Magic based in a filigree-like scrawl used to apply power to objects and tools, the foundation of Artificy, and Magitech, and thus the foundation of how technology works in Talahm.
 
Sigil Magic - **No spells have Verbal Components and all spells with damage die deal +1d of damage.** **All spells are concentration spells.** A rival to Conditional Magic for its reliability, based around a magical script that can manipulate the fabric of reality, drawn into the air in the form of glyphs and sigils, manipulated by the hands. Sigil Magic is a very Somatic-Heavy magic, trading the need for verbal components with a written magical script, with the drawback that it requires far more concentration to hold, and lack of "set it and forget it spells" meaning castors cannot move or defend themselves when needed, leaving them more vulnerable.
 
Elemental Magic - **All material components are replaced with elemental material. The material depends on the element. Expensive Components are half priced. All spells have spell failure chances, and spell failures require a roll on the Wild Magic table. The Spell failures depend on the element use. Primary elements (fire, wind, water, earth) have a 20% failure chance but increase the damage die on all damaging spells, and the duration and range by 50%. Secondary Elements (Plant, Dust, Glass, Acid, Storm, Sand) grants an additional damage die but has a spell failure of 10%, Tertiary Elements (Smoke, Spark, Rot, Debris, Food, Crystal, Sediment) has a spell failure of 5% but grants proficiency bonus to damage.** A Magic popular among Genasi that uses elements derived from specially treated material. A Brazier treated with magic that can form fire spells, or a special treated leather flask that produces endless water for magic. All spells are manipulated through the element they are cast in. Primary Elements (Earth, Wind, Fire, Water) are more powerful, but more difficult to control. Secondary or even Tertiary elements, like sand, smoke, glass, mud, ice, plant, and magnetism, are subsequentially less powerful, but often more reliable.
 
Sympathetic Magic or Symbolic Magic - **Spells cast gain a +level to damage die but increase by one level of casting time. Instantaneous becomes bonus action, bonus action becomes action, action becomes 2 actions, all other casting times are doubled.** A Materials Based magic that revolves around effigy and association. The manipulation of magic by manipulating things associated with the effect. For instance one may build a small fire in a bowl and dust that fire with cinnamon, using the flares and harnessing them for fire evocation, such as firebolt. Or using a strand of a persons hair prepared with a doll for charm magic, such as charm person or dominate. This form of magic is considered very superstitious and adjacent to Witchcraft, which is fair because it was taught first by the Hags. Its advantage is its potency at a cost for how long it often takes to cast.
 
Catalytic Magic **- Catalyst replaces all components with the exception of expensive components, expensive components can be half value. Increases duration and range by 50% Spells can only be upcast with an additional cost of 25 sticks per spell level of gem dust. All damage die are -1. If the damage is only 1 die, the die is demoted to the die level below it. In the case of magic missile the spell contains -1 missile.** Often viewed as a "training" magic, catalytic magic is magic based on a specific physical component called a catalyst. This can be a wand, a staff, a crystal, anything that can hold magic power. An object is imbued with a spell and it is the use of that object that creates the magical effect. Because of this Catalytic magic replaces all components at the cost of being significanty weaker. Its reliability coming with its lack of versatility.
 
Tattoo Magic - **Tattoo spells are always prepared and can be cast component less, as they were used in the making of the tattoo. Expensive Material components being the exception, but they are half off any cast. Tattoo Magic grants an additional spell per day at levels 1, 5, 10, 15, and 20, that can be used for any level of casting. Tattoo Magic is limited to the amount of spells that the holder can learn, as the body only has room for 20 spells. Tattoos can only be added over the course of a long rest in a safe environment with assistance of a tattoo artist. In addition, if a magical tattoo is used by a non Tattoo specialist, it requires 2 prepared spell slots.** Tattoo magic is the use of magical tattoos as a spellbook and casting mechanism.n