# Introduction
 
Talahm Solas, or just Talahm (Tay-Lum) in casual speak is a world reeling and repairing from conflict, the Great War. A civil war that had expanded out to a worldwide conflict as alliances and factions drew on both sides. And while we believe the good guys won and the Crimson King's fascist rebellion was squashed, the scars still pock the land and the hearts of the people. A new species, the Construct, a set of humanoid machines developed to fight the great war, had gained sentience during the war and are now struggling to find their place in a divided land under the circumstance of peace, which they were not made for.
 
Talahm is also a land of progress. Following the illumination: Magic has been taken out of the hands of soothsayers and charlatans, and elevated to the academic craft that it is, and used as a lens to explain our world. Magic has been wielded and refined to develop all sorts of wonderous machines, from automotion carts, to the telewire, to trains. Owing the apparent success of the newest nation, the United Federation of Vassal States, increasing number of civilizations are moving out of the dark ages of kings and empires and into the modern age of Democracy and Republics. The cities skylines have never looked higher, and leaving the great war finally the future has never looked brighter.
 
# The Important Stuff
 
If you read nothing else, consider the following when running Talahm. These are the important parts of running this setting properly.

1. **Fully Compatible.** Talahm is a big and beautiful world, that can contain anything found in any other D&D Setting and more. The entire project of Talahm is to take well established elements and look at them from a new perspective. Tiefling are hated, for instance, but it has less to do with their "Demonic Heritage" which is a stereotype, but more to do with their status as perpetual outsiders as nomads. Orcs are mistrusted because of strained relations with the UFVS and Baohu.
2. **Nothing in Talahm is Naturally bad.** There are no evil species native to Talahm. While planar entities still may be evil, and individuals may be evil, the concept of something having a natural disposition is realm of stereotyping. Most creatures are very similar when it comes to the average experience, but are often too focused on the differences. Stereotypes exists, but they are incomplete and often wrongheaded assumptions.
3. **Tone.** Talahm as a setting is often about its contradictions. It is a bright eyed, with a fundamental optimism and hope for the future, but it is also beset with corruption, evil, and an often unequal now. Orcs have just recently received the right of Universal Suffrage in the UFVS, despite many orcish roots in Grovenvaulte going back hundreds of years. This tension between optimism and a heartbreaking reality of the world is part of the feel of this world, and both need to be cared to.
4. **Magic as Science.** Magic did for Talahm what engineering and science did for earth, transformed it. Most technological accomplishments are magical in nature, from cars, to guns, to the lights in the house are generally accomplished through a magical script/engraving "Wiring system" often called "filigree" but the practical magicians and artificers who make it. It is through this all wonderous technology that make the world is possible. Magic is common, it is not unusual for standard workers to know basic spells as part of general education, Bachelors Degree Magicians often work specialized jobs in power and assembly. Talahm could no less operate without magic as our world could without electricity.
5. **A Urbanized D&D world is still a D&D world.** There is still adventure to be had, and much of the worlds history, legal structure, and storytelling support the long and beloved art of adventuring. Expeditions into the ruins of Colomb Bith are still ongoing an lucrative. Magical creatures still roam the developed highways, though some have joined the urbanization as well. Ancient Ruins still exist unexplored. Running them is just a change of perspective. Perhaps consider Indiana Jones as a dungeon delver, or a modernish expedition team. HOW we adventure in a Modern setting may have changed but THAT we do is eternal.
6. **A world healing from war.** A Central Theme of Talahm is healing. The Great War, Sometimes known as the UFVS Civil War, or the Crimson King's Rebellion, was a civil war started by a fascist secession and derepublicanizing of 7 States in the UFVS, but soon snowballed into a worldwide conflict as alliances and rivalries were drawn around this conflict. It has been 8 years since the conclusion of the Great War but the scars run deep. Not just in the land which is pocked by bomb marks and derilict battlefields, and hidden minefields that still claim hundreds of lives every year. But Also in the hearts of its people, who have lost trust for their neighbor, and desperately wish to return to before. How you heal when you can no longer trust your neighbor is core to the identity of Talahm, and the ups and downs, goods and bad are things best explored in equal measure.
7. **It's Never Hopeless.** Talahm as a setting is never about fatalism. While it explores heavy subject, it is not with the approach of answering an unanswerable question with "It's hopeless." But instead to focus on how we can begin to surmount this seemingly insurmountable task.
 
# The Purpose and Intended Use of this Book.
 
This book exists to establish the setting, tone, and basic history to run Talahm. This is _not_ intended to be a bible. Talahm is a large world, and many things are unknown or a matter of debate, and the game runner or table can have their opinions on it. You are meant to add to Talahm, as this world will always be a work in progress, and if you add there comes changes, I hope that the story those changes make is great. Use this book to inspire you, not to tie you down.